---
author: "Konstantina Anastasiadou, Zofia Rogacka-Trojak, Amy van der Meijden, Andriana Tzanidou, Jimmy Oei"
title: "Flow-Sate: Developer Well-being Plugin "
image: "img/g13_wellbeing_plugin/logo.png"
summary: "We present _Flow-State_, a VS Code IDE plugin designed to enhance developer productivity and flow, reduce cognitive load, and promote well-being. Our design draws inspiration from the SPACE and DevEx frameworks. The plugin consists of various features for monitoring individual cognitive load, such as the add-to-delete ratio and large code insertions. It additionally helps developers sustain their focus and prevent burnout by including features such as a Pomodoro timer and real-time feedback alerts. It offloads reviewer cognitive load by analyzing Pull Request characteristics such as lines of code, cognitive complexity, and unused dependencies before code is committed."
paper: "../papers/g13_wellbeing_plugin.pdf"
source: "https://github.com/ZofiaRT/flow-state"
group_number: 13
identifier: "p2_hacking_sustainability_2026" # Do not change this
all_projects_page: "../p2_hacking_sustainability" # Do not change this
---
  Software engineering is inherently cognitively demanding, frequently pushing developers towards burnout through silent mental fatigue, a burden that is ultimately transferred onto teammates through complex code reviews. Existing developer productivity tools typically focus either on static code analysis or on tracking developer activity. However, no unified IDE solution currently addresses both the developer’s individual cognitive load and the resulting burden placed on reviewers. In this paper, we present _Flow-State_, a VS Code IDE plugin designed to enhance developer productivity and flow, reduce cognitive load, and promote well-being. Our design draws inspiration from the SPACE and DevEx frameworks. The plugin consists of various features for monitoring individual cognitive load, such as the add-to-delete ratio and large code insertions. It additionally helps developers sustain their focus and prevent burnout by including features such as a Pomodoro timer and real-time feedback alerts. It offloads reviewer cognitive load by analyzing Pull Request characteristics such as lines of code, cognitive complexity, and unused dependencies before code is committed. We evaluate our proposed solution through Scenario-Based Design and Evaluation, by introducing realistic developer personas. Our results demonstrate that continuous background behavioral tracking can effectively diagnose and mitigate cognitive friction and, at the same time, tackle team-wide burnout.